Chapter 3
There was music from my neighbor’s house
through the summer nights. In his blue gardens
men and girls came and went like moths among
the whisperings and the champagne and the
stars. At high tide in the afternoon I watched
his guests diving from the tower of his raft,
or taking the sun on the hot sand of his beach
while his two motor-boats slit the waters
of the Sound, drawing aquaplanes over cataracts
of foam. On week-ends his Rolls-Royce became
an omnibus, bearing parties to and from the
city between nine in the morning and long
past midnight, while his station wagon scampered
like a brisk yellow bug to meet all trains.
And on Mondays eight servants, including an
extra gardener, toiled all day with mops and
scrubbing-brushes and hammers and garden-shears,
repairing the ravages of the night before.
Every Friday five crates of oranges and lemons
arrived from a fruiterer in New York — every
Monday these same oranges and lemons left
his back door in a pyramid of pulpless halves.
There was a machine in the kitchen which could
extract the juice of two hundred oranges in
half an hour if a little button was pressed
two hundred times by a butler’s thumb.
At least once a fortnight a corps of caterers
came down with several hundred feet of canvas
and enough colored lights to make a Christmas
tree of Gatsby’s enormous garden. On buffet
tables, garnished with glistening hors-d’oeuvre,
spiced baked hams crowded against salads of
harlequin designs and pastry pigs and turkeys
bewitched to a dark gold. In the main hall
a bar with a real brass rail was set up, and
stocked with gins and liquors and with cordials
so long forgotten that most of his female
guests were too young to know one from another.
By seven o’clock the orchestra has arrived,
no thin five-piece affair, but a whole pitful
of oboes and trombones and saxophones and
viols and cornets and piccolos, and low and
high drums. The last swimmers have come in
from the beach now and are dressing up-stairs;
the cars from New York are parked five deep
in the drive, and already the halls and salons
and verandas are gaudy with primary colors,
and hair shorn in strange new ways, and shawls
beyond the dreams of Castile. The bar is in
full swing, and floating rounds of cocktails
permeate the garden outside, until the air
is alive with chatter and laughter, and casual
innuendo and introductions forgotten on the
spot, and enthusiastic meetings between women
who never knew each other’s names.
The lights grow brighter as the earth lurches
away from the sun, and now the orchestra is
playing yellow cocktail music, and the opera
of voices pitches a key higher. Laughter is
easier minute by minute, spilled with prodigality,
tipped out at a cheerful word. The groups
change more swiftly, swell with new arrivals,
dissolve and form in the same breath; already
there are wanderers, confident girls who weave
here and there among the stouter and more
stable, become for a sharp, joyous moment
the centre of a group, and then, excited with
triumph, glide on through the sea-change of
faces and voices and color under the constantly
changing light.
Suddenly one of the gypsies, in trembling
opal, seizes a cocktail out of the air, dumps
it down for courage and, moving her hands
like Frisco, dances out alone on the canvas
platform. A momentary hush; the orchestra
leader varies his rhythm obligingly for her,
and there is a burst of chatter as the erroneous
news goes around that she is Gilda Gray’s
understudy from the Follies. The party has
begun.
I believe that on the first night I went to
Gatsby’s house I was one of the few guests
who had actually been invited. People were
not invited — they went there. They got
into automobiles which bore them out to Long
Island, and somehow they ended up at Gatsby’s
door. Once there they were introduced by somebody
who knew Gatsby, and after that they conducted
themselves according to the rules of behavior
associated with amusement parks. Sometimes
they came and went without having met Gatsby
at all, came for the party with a simplicity
of heart that was its own ticket of admission.
I had been actually invited. A chauffeur in
a uniform of robin’s-egg blue crossed my
lawn early that Saturday morning with a surprisingly
formal note from his employer: the honor would
be entirely Gatsby’s, it said, if I would
attend his “little party” that night.
He had seen me several times, and had intended
to call on me long before, but a peculiar
combination of circumstances had prevented
it — signed Jay Gatsby, in a majestic hand.
Dressed up in white flannels I went over to
his lawn a little after seven, and wandered
around rather ill at ease among swirls and
eddies of people I didn’t know — though
here and there was a face I had noticed on
the commuting train. I was immediately struck
by the number of young Englishmen dotted about;
all well dressed, all looking a little hungry,
and all talking in low, earnest voices to
solid and prosperous Americans. I was sure
that they were selling something: bonds or
insurance or automobiles. They were at least
agonizingly aware of the easy money in the
vicinity and convinced that it was theirs
for a few words in the right key.
As soon as I arrived I made an attempt to
find my host, but the two or three people
of whom I asked his whereabouts stared at
me in such an amazed way, and denied so vehemently
any knowledge of his movements, that I slunk
off in the direction of the cocktail table
— the only place in the garden where a single
man could linger without looking purposeless
and alone.
I was on my way to get roaring drunk from
sheer embarrassment when Jordan Baker came
out of the house and stood at the head of
the marble steps, leaning a little backward
and looking with contemptuous interest down
into the garden.
Welcome or not, I found it necessary to attach
myself to some one before I should begin to
address cordial remarks to the passers-by.
“Hello!” I roared, advancing toward her.
My voice seemed unnaturally loud across the
garden.
“I thought you might be here,” she responded
absently as I came up. “I remembered you
lived next door to ——” She held my hand
impersonally, as a promise that she’d take
care of me in a minute, and gave ear to two
girls in twin yellow dresses, who stopped
at the foot of the steps.
“Hello!” they cried together. “Sorry
you didn’t win.”
That was for the golf tournament. She had
lost in the finals the week before.
“You don’t know who we are,” said one
of the girls in yellow, “but we met you
here about a month ago.”
“You’ve dyed your hair since then,”
remarked Jordan, and I started, but the girls
had moved casually on and her remark was addressed
to the premature moon, produced like the supper,
no doubt, out of a caterer’s basket. With
Jordan’s slender golden arm resting in mine,
we descended the steps and sauntered about
the garden. A tray of cocktails floated at
us through the twilight, and we sat down at
a table with the two girls in yellow and three
men, each one introduced to us as Mr. Mumble.
“Do you come to these parties often?”
inquired Jordan of the girl beside her.
“The last one was the one I met you at,”
answered the girl, in an alert confident voice.
She turned to her companion: “Wasn’t it
for you, Lucille?”
It was for Lucille, too.
“I like to come,” Lucille said. “I never
care what I do, so I always have a good time.
When I was here last I tore my gown on a chair,
and he asked me my name and address — inside
of a week I got a package from Croirier’s
with a new evening gown in it.”
“Did you keep it?” asked Jordan.
“Sure I did. I was going to wear it to-night,
but it was too big in the bust and had to
be altered. It was gas blue with lavender
beads. Two hundred and sixty-five dollars.”
“There’s something funny about a fellow
that’ll do a thing like that,” said the
other girl eagerly. “He doesn’t want any
trouble with anybody.”
“Who doesn’t?” I inquired.
“Gatsby. Somebody told me ——”
The two girls and Jordan leaned together confidentially.
“Somebody told me they thought he killed
a man once.”
A thrill passed over all of us. The three
Mr. Mumbles bent forward and listened eagerly.
“I don’t think it’s so much that,”
argued Lucille sceptically; “it’s more
that he was a German spy during the war.”
One of the men nodded in confirmation.
“I heard that from a man who knew all about
him, grew up with him in Germany,” he assured
us positively.
“Oh, no,” said the first girl, “it couldn’t
be that, because he was in the American army
during the war.” As our credulity switched
back to her she leaned forward with enthusiasm.
“You look at him sometimes when he thinks
nobody’s looking at him. I’ll bet he killed
a man.”
She narrowed her eyes and shivered. Lucille
shivered. We all turned and looked around
for Gatsby. It was testimony to the romantic
speculation he inspired that there were whispers
about him from those who found little that
it was necessary to whisper about in this
world.
The first supper — there would be another
one after midnight — was now being served,
and Jordan invited me to join her own party,
who were spread around a table on the other
side of the garden. There were three married
couples and Jordan’s escort, a persistent
undergraduate given to violent innuendo, and
obviously under the impression that sooner
or later Jordan was going to yield him up
her person to a greater or lesser degree.
Instead of rambling, this party had preserved
a dignified homogeneity, and assumed to itself
the function of representing the staid nobility
of the country-side — East Egg condescending
to West Egg, and carefully on guard against
its spectroscopic gayety.
“Let’s get out,” whispered Jordan, after
a somehow wasteful and inappropriate half-hour.
“This is much too polite for me.”
We got up, and she explained that we were
going to find the host: I had never met him,
she said, and it was making me uneasy. The
undergraduate nodded in a cynical, melancholy
way.
The bar, where we glanced first, was crowded,
but Gatsby was not there. She couldn’t find
him from the top of the steps, and he wasn’t
on the veranda. On a chance we tried an important-looking
door, and walked into a high Gothic library,
panelled with carved English oak, and probably
transported complete from some ruin overseas.
A stout, middle-aged man, with enormous owl-eyed
spectacles, was sitting somewhat drunk on
the edge of a great table, staring with unsteady
concentration at the shelves of books. As
we entered he wheeled excitedly around and
examined Jordan from head to foot.
“What do you think?” he demanded impetuously.
“About what?” He waved his hand toward
the book-shelves.
“About that. As a matter of fact you needn’t
bother to ascertain. I ascertained. They’re
real.”
“The books?”
He nodded.
“Absolutely real — have pages and everything.
I thought they’d be a nice durable cardboard.
Matter of fact, they’re absolutely real.
Pages and — Here! Lemme show you.”
Taking our scepticism for granted, he rushed
to the bookcases and returned with Volume
One of the “Stoddard Lectures.”
“See!” he cried triumphantly. “It’s
a bona-fide piece of printed matter. It fooled
me. This fella’s a regular Belasco. It’s
a triumph. What thoroughness! What realism!
Knew when to stop, too — didn’t cut the
pages. But what do you want? What do you expect?”
He snatched the book from me and replaced
it hastily on its shelf, muttering that if
one brick was removed the whole library was
liable to collapse.
“Who brought you?” he demanded. “Or
did you just come? I was brought. Most people
were brought.”
Jordan looked at him alertly, cheerfully,
without answering.
“I was brought by a woman named Roosevelt,”
he continued. “Mrs. Claud Roosevelt. Do
you know her? I met her somewhere last night.
I’ve been drunk for about a week now, and
I thought it might sober me up to sit in a
library.”
“Has it?”
“A little bit, I think. I can’t tell yet.
I’ve only been here an hour. Did I tell
you about the books? They’re real. They’re
——”
“You told us.” We shook hands with him
gravely and went back outdoors.
There was dancing now on the canvas in the
garden; old men pushing young girls backward
in eternal graceless circles, superior couples
holding each other tortuously, fashionably,
and keeping in the corners — and a great
number of single girls dancing individualistically
or relieving the orchestra for a moment of
the burden of the banjo or the traps. By midnight
the hilarity had increased. A celebrated tenor
had sung in Italian, and a notorious contralto
had sung in jazz, and between the numbers
people were doing “stunts” all over the
garden, while happy, vacuous bursts of laughter
rose toward the summer sky. A pair of stage
twins, who turned out to be the girls in yellow,
did a baby act in costume, and champagne was
served in glasses bigger than finger-bowls.
The moon had risen higher, and floating in
the Sound was a triangle of silver scales,
trembling a little to the stiff, tinny drip
of the banjoes on the lawn.
I was still with Jordan Baker. We were sitting
at a table with a man of about my age and
a rowdy little girl, who gave way upon the
slightest provocation to uncontrollable laughter.
I was enjoying myself now. I had taken two
finger-bowls of champagne, and the scene had
changed before my eyes into something significant,
elemental, and profound.
At a lull in the entertainment the man looked
at me and smiled.
“Your face is familiar,” he said, politely.
“Weren’t you in the Third Division during
the war?”
“Why, yes. I was in the Ninth Machine-gun
Battalion.”
“I was in the Seventh Infantry until June
nineteen-eighteen. I knew I’d seen you somewhere
before.”
We talked for a moment about some wet, gray
little villages in France. Evidently he lived
in this vicinity, for he told me that he had
just bought a hydroplane, and was going to
try it out in the morning.
“Want to go with me, old sport? Just near
the shore along the Sound.”
“What time?”
“Any time that suits you best.”
It was on the tip of my tongue to ask his
name when Jordan looked around and smiled.
“Having a gay time now?” she inquired.
“Much better.” I turned again to my new
acquaintance. “This is an unusual party
for me. I haven’t even seen the host. I
live over there ——” I waved my hand
at the invisible hedge in the distance, “and
this man Gatsby sent over his chauffeur with
an invitation.” For a moment he looked at
me as if he failed to understand.
“I’m Gatsby,” he said suddenly.
“What!” I exclaimed. “Oh, I beg your
pardon.”
“I thought you knew, old sport. I’m afraid
I’m not a very good host.”
He smiled understandingly — much more than
understandingly. It was one of those rare
smiles with a quality of eternal reassurance
in it, that you may come across four or five
times in life. It faced — or seemed to face
— the whole external world for an instant,
and then concentrated on you with an irresistible
prejudice in your favor. It understood you
just so far as you wanted to be understood,
believed in you as you would like to believe
in yourself, and assured you that it had precisely
the impression of you that, at your best,
you hoped to convey. Precisely at that point
it vanished — and I was looking at an elegant
young rough-neck, a year or two over thirty,
whose elaborate formality of speech just missed
being absurd. Some time before he introduced
himself I’d got a strong impression that
he was picking his words with care.
Almost at the moment when Mr. Gatsby identified
himself, a butler hurried toward him with
the information that Chicago was calling him
on the wire. He excused himself with a small
bow that included each of us in turn.
“If you want anything just ask for it, old
sport,” he urged me. “Excuse me. I will
rejoin you later.”
When he was gone I turned immediately to Jordan
— constrained to assure her of my surprise.
I had expected that Mr. Gatsby would be a
florid and corpulent person in his middle
years.
“Who is he?” I demanded.
“Do you know?”
“He’s just a man named Gatsby.”
“Where is he from, I mean? And what does
he do?”
“Now you’re started on the subject,”
she answered with a wan smile. “Well, he
told me once he was an Oxford man.” A dim
background started to take shape behind him,
but at her next remark it faded away.
“However, I don’t believe it.”
“Why not?” “I don’t know,” she insisted,
“I just don’t think he went there.”
Something in her tone reminded me of the other
girl’s “I think he killed a man,” and
had the effect of stimulating my curiosity.
I would have accepted without question the
information that Gatsby sprang from the swamps
of Louisiana or from the lower East Side of
New York. That was comprehensible. But young
men didn’t — at least in my provincial
inexperience I believed they didn’t — drift
coolly out of nowhere and buy a palace on
Long Island Sound.
“Anyhow, he gives large parties,” said
Jordan, changing the subject with an urbane
distaste for the concrete. “And I like large
parties. They’re so intimate. At small parties
there isn’t any privacy.”
There was the boom of a bass drum, and the
voice of the orchestra leader rang out suddenly
above the echolalia of the garden.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” he cried. “At
the request of Mr. Gatsby we are going to
play for you Mr. Vladimir Tostoff’s latest
work, which attracted so much attention at
Carnegie Hall last May. If you read the papers,
you know there was a big sensation.” He
smiled with jovial condescension, and added:
“Some sensation!” Whereupon everybody
laughed.
“The piece is known,” he concluded lustily,
“as Vladimir Tostoff’s Jazz History of
the World.”
The nature of Mr. Tostoff’s composition
eluded me, because just as it began my eyes
fell on Gatsby, standing alone on the marble
steps and looking from one group to another
with approving eyes. His tanned skin was drawn
attractively tight on his face and his short
hair looked as though it were trimmed every
day. I could see nothing sinister about him.
I wondered if the fact that he was not drinking
helped to set him off from his guests, for
it seemed to me that he grew more correct
as the fraternal hilarity increased. When
the Jazz History of the World was over, girls
were putting their heads on men’s shoulders
in a puppyish, convivial way, girls were swooning
backward playfully into men’s arms, even
into groups, knowing that some one would arrest
their falls — but no one swooned backward
on Gatsby, and no French bob touched Gatsby’s
shoulder, and no singing quartets were formed
with Gatsby’s head for one link.
“I beg your pardon.”
Gatsby’s butler was suddenly standing beside
us.
“Miss Baker?” he inquired. “I beg your
pardon, but Mr. Gatsby would like to speak
to you alone.”
“With me?” she exclaimed in surprise.
“Yes, madame.”
She got up slowly, raising her eyebrows at
me in astonishment, and followed the butler
toward the house. I noticed that she wore
her evening-dress, all her dresses, like sports
clothes — there was a jauntiness about her
movements as if she had first learned to walk
upon golf courses on clean, crisp mornings.
I was alone and it was almost two. For some
time confused and intriguing sounds had issued
from a long, many-windowed room which overhung
the terrace. Eluding Jordan’s undergraduate,
who was now engaged in an obstetrical conversation
with two chorus girls, and who implored me
to join him, I went inside.
The large room was full of people. One of
the girls in yellow was playing the piano,
and beside her stood a tall, red-haired young
lady from a famous chorus, engaged in song.
She had drunk a quantity of champagne, and
during the course of her song she had decided,
ineptly, that everything was very, very sad
— she was not only singing, she was weeping
too. Whenever there was a pause in the song
she filled it with gasping, broken sobs, and
then took up the lyric again in a quavering
soprano. The tears coursed down her cheeks
— not freely, however, for when they came
into contact with her heavily beaded eyelashes
they assumed an inky color, and pursued the
rest of their way in slow black rivulets.
A humorous suggestion was made that she sing
the notes on her face, whereupon she threw
up her hands, sank into a chair, and went
off into a deep vinous sleep.
“She had a fight with a man who says he’s
her husband,” explained a girl at my elbow.
I looked around. Most of the remaining women
were now having fights with men said to be
their husbands. Even Jordan’s party, the
quartet from East Egg, were rent asunder by
dissension. One of the men was talking with
curious intensity to a young actress, and
his wife, after attempting to laugh at the
situation in a dignified and indifferent way,
broke down entirely and resorted to flank
attacks — at intervals she appeared suddenly
at his side like an angry diamond, and hissed:
“You promised!” into his ear.
The reluctance to go home was not confined
to wayward men. The hall was at present occupied
by two deplorably sober men and their highly
indignant wives. The wives were sympathizing
with each other in slightly raised voices.
“Whenever he sees I’m having a good time
he wants to go home.”
“Never heard anything so selfish in my life.”
“We’re always the first ones to leave.”
“So are we.”
“Well, we’re almost the last to-night,”
said one of the men sheepishly. “The orchestra
left half an hour ago.”
In spite of the wives’ agreement that such
malevolence was beyond credibility, the dispute
ended in a short struggle, and both wives
were lifted, kicking, into the night.
As I waited for my hat in the hall the door
of the library opened and Jordan Baker and
Gatsby came out together. He was saying some
last word to her, but the eagerness in his
manner tightened abruptly into formality as
several people approached him to say good-bye.
Jordan’s party were calling impatiently
to her from the porch, but she lingered for
a moment to shake hands.
“I’ve just heard the most amazing thing,”
she whispered. “How long were we in there?”
“Why, about an hour.” “It was — simply
amazing,” she repeated abstractedly. “But
I swore I wouldn’t tell it and here I am
tantalizing you.” She yawned gracefully
in my face: “Please come and see me. . . . Phone
book . . . Under the name of Mrs. Sigourney
Howard . . . My aunt . . . ” She was hurrying
off as she talked — her brown hand waved
a jaunty salute as she melted into her party
at the door.
Rather ashamed that on my first appearance
I had stayed so late, I joined the last of
Gatsby’s guests, who were clustered around
him. I wanted to explain that I’d hunted
for him early in the evening and to apologize
for not having known him in the garden.
“Don’t mention it,” he enjoined me eagerly.
“Don’t give it another thought, old sport.”
The familiar expression held no more familiarity
than the hand which reassuringly brushed my
shoulder. “And don’t forget we’re going
up in the hydroplane to-morrow morning, at
nine o’clock.”
Then the butler, behind his shoulder: “Philadelphia
wants you on the ‘phone, sir.”
“All right, in a minute. Tell them I’ll
be right there. . . . good night.”
“Good night.”
“Good night.” He smiled — and suddenly
there seemed to be a pleasant significance
in having been among the last to go, as if
he had desired it all the time. “Good night,
old sport. . . . good night.”
But as I walked down the steps I saw that
the evening was not quite over. Fifty feet
from the door a dozen headlights illuminated
a bizarre and tumultuous scene. In the ditch
beside the road, right side up, but violently
shorn of one wheel, rested a new coupe which
had left Gatsby’s drive not two minutes
before. The sharp jut of a wall accounted
for the detachment of the wheel, which was
now getting considerable attention from half
a dozen curious chauffeurs. However, as they
had left their cars blocking the road, a harsh,
discordant din from those in the rear had
been audible for some time, and added to the
already violent confusion of the scene.
A man in a long duster had dismounted from
the wreck and now stood in the middle of the
road, looking from the car to the tire and
from the tire to the observers in a pleasant,
puzzled way.
“See!” he explained. “It went in the
ditch.”
The fact was infinitely astonishing to him,
and I recognized first the unusual quality
of wonder, and then the man — it was the
late patron of Gatsby’s library.
“How’d it happen?”
He shrugged his shoulders.
“I know nothing whatever about mechanics,”
he said decisively.
“But how did it happen? Did you run into
the wall?” “Don’t ask me,” said Owl
Eyes, washing his hands of the whole matter.
“I know very little about driving — next
to nothing. It happened, and that’s all
I know.”
“Well, if you’re a poor driver you oughtn’t
to try driving at night.”
“But I wasn’t even trying,” he explained
indignantly, “I wasn’t even trying.”
An awed hush fell upon the bystanders.
“Do you want to commit suicide?”
“You’re lucky it was just a wheel! A bad
driver and not even trying!”
“You don’t understand,” explained the
criminal. “I wasn’t driving. There’s
another man in the car.”
The shock that followed this declaration found
voice in a sustained “Ah-h-h!” as the
door of the coupe swung slowly open. The crowd
— it was now a crowd — stepped back involuntarily,
and when the door had opened wide there was
a ghostly pause. Then, very gradually, part
by part, a pale, dangling individual stepped
out of the wreck, pawing tentatively at the
ground with a large uncertain dancing shoe.
Blinded by the glare of the headlights and
confused by the incessant groaning of the
horns, the apparition stood swaying for a
moment before he perceived the man in the
duster.
“Wha’s matter?” he inquired calmly.
“Did we run outa gas?”
“Look!”
Half a dozen fingers pointed at the amputated
wheel — he stared at it for a moment, and
then looked upward as though he suspected
that it had dropped from the sky.
“It came off,” some one explained.
He nodded.
“At first I din’ notice we’d stopped.”
A pause. Then, taking a long breath and straightening
his shoulders, he remarked in a determined
voice:
“Wonder’ff tell me where there’s a gas’line
station?”
At least a dozen men, some of them little
better off than he was, explained to him that
wheel and car were no longer joined by any
physical bond.
“Back out,” he suggested after a moment.
“Put her in reverse.”
“But the wheel’s off!”
He hesitated.
“No harm in trying,” he said.
The caterwauling horns had reached a crescendo
and I turned away and cut across the lawn
toward home. I glanced back once. A wafer
of a moon was shining over Gatsby’s house,
making the night fine as before, and surviving
the laughter and the sound of his still glowing
garden. A sudden emptiness seemed to flow
now from the windows and the great doors,
endowing with complete isolation the figure
of the host, who stood on the porch, his hand
up in a formal gesture of farewell.
Reading over what I have written so far, I
see I have given the impression that the events
of three nights several weeks apart were all
that absorbed me. On the contrary, they were
merely casual events in a crowded summer,
and, until much later, they absorbed me infinitely
less than my personal affairs.
Most of the time I worked. In the early morning
the sun threw my shadow westward as I hurried
down the white chasms of lower New York to
the Probity Trust. I knew the other clerks
and young bond-salesmen by their first names,
and lunched with them in dark, crowded restaurants
on little pig sausages and mashed potatoes
and coffee. I even had a short affair with
a girl who lived in Jersey City and worked
in the accounting department, but her brother
began throwing mean looks in my direction,
so when she went on her vacation in July I
let it blow quietly away.
I took dinner usually at the Yale Club — for
some reason it was the gloomiest event of
my day — and then I went up-stairs to the
library and studied investments and securities
for a conscientious hour. There were generally
a few rioters around, but they never came
into the library, so it was a good place to
work. After that, if the night was mellow,
I strolled down Madison Avenue past the old
Murray Hill Hotel, and over 33rd Street to
the Pennsylvania Station.
I began to like New York, the racy, adventurous
feel of it at night, and the satisfaction
that the constant flicker of men and women
and machines gives to the restless eye. I
liked to walk up Fifth Avenue and pick out
romantic women from the crowd and imagine
that in a few minutes I was going to enter
into their lives, and no one would ever know
or disapprove. Sometimes, in my mind, I followed
them to their apartments on the corners of
hidden streets, and they turned and smiled
back at me before they faded through a door
into warm darkness. At the enchanted metropolitan
twilight I felt a haunting loneliness sometimes,
and felt it in others — poor young clerks
who loitered in front of windows waiting until
it was time for a solitary restaurant dinner
— young clerks in the dusk, wasting the
most poignant moments of night and life.
Again at eight o’clock, when the dark lanes
of the Forties were five deep with throbbing
taxi-cabs, bound for the theatre district,
I felt a sinking in my heart. Forms leaned
together in the taxis as they waited, and
voices sang, and there was laughter from unheard
jokes, and lighted cigarettes outlined unintelligible
70 gestures inside. Imagining that I, too,
was hurrying toward gayety and sharing their
intimate excitement, I wished them well.
For a while I lost sight of Jordan Baker,
and then in midsummer I found her again. At
first I was flattered to go places with her,
because she was a golf champion, and every
one knew her name. Then it was something more.
I wasn’t actually in love, but I felt a
sort of tender curiosity. The bored haughty
face that she turned to the world concealed
something — most affectations conceal something
eventually, even though they don’t in the
beginning — and one day I found what it
was. When we were on a house-party together
up in Warwick, she left a borrowed car out
in the rain with the top down, and then lied
about it — and suddenly I remembered the
story about her that had eluded me that night
at Daisy’s. At her first big golf tournament
there was a row that nearly reached the newspapers
— a suggestion that she had moved her ball
from a bad lie in the semi-final round. The
thing approached the proportions of a scandal
— then died away. A caddy retracted his
statement, and the only other witness admitted
that he might have been mistaken. The incident
and the name had remained together in my mind.
Jordan Baker instinctively avoided clever,
shrewd men, and now I saw that this was because
she felt safer on a plane where any divergence
from a code would be thought impossible. She
was incurably dishonest. She wasn’t able
to endure being at a disadvantage and, given
this unwillingness, I suppose she had begun
dealing in subterfuges when she was very young
in order to keep that cool, insolent smile
turned to the world and yet satisfy the demands
of her hard, jaunty body.
It made no difference to me. Dishonesty in
a woman is a thing you never blame deeply
— I was casually sorry, and then I forgot.
It was on that same house party that we had
a curious conversation about driving a car.
It started because she passed so close to
some workmen that our fender flicked a button
on one man’s coat.
“You’re a rotten driver,” I protested.
“Either you ought to be more careful, or
you oughtn’t to drive at all.”
“I am careful.”
“No, you’re not.”
“Well, other people are,” she said lightly.
“What’s that got to do with it?”
“They’ll keep out of my way,” she insisted.
“It takes two to make an accident.”
“Suppose you met somebody just as careless
as yourself.”
“I hope I never will,” she answered. “I
hate careless people. That’s why I like
you.”
Her gray, sun-strained eyes stared straight
ahead, but she had deliberately shifted our
relations, and for a moment I thought I loved
her. But I am slow-thinking and full of interior
rules that act as brakes on my desires, and
I knew that first I had to get myself definitely
out of that tangle back home. I’d been writing
letters once a week and signing them: “Love,
Nick,” and all I could think of was how,
when that certain girl played tennis, a faint
mustache of perspiration appeared on her upper
lip. Nevertheless there was a vague understanding
that had to be tactfully broken off before
I was free.
Every one suspects himself of at least one
of the cardinal virtues, and this is mine:
I am one of the few honest people that I have
ever known.